README.md, before:

PgBouncer
=========

Lightweight connection pooler for PostgreSQL.

Homepage: <https://www.pgbouncer.org/>

Sources, bug tracking: <https://github.com/pgbouncer/pgbouncer>

Building
---------

PgBouncer depends on few things to get compiled:

* [GNU Make] 3.81+
* [Libevent] 2.0+
* [pkg-config]
* [OpenSSL] 1.0.1+ for TLS support
* (optional) [c-ares] as alternative to Libevent's evdns
* (optional) PAM libraries

[GNU Make]: https://www.gnu.org/software/make/
[Libevent]: http://libevent.org/
[pkg-config]: https://www.freedesktop.org/wiki/Software/pkg-config/
[OpenSSL]: https://www.openssl.org/
[c-ares]: http://c-ares.haxx.se/

When dependencies are installed just run:

    $ ./configure --prefix=/usr/local
    $ make
    $ make install

If you are building from Git, or are building for Windows, please see
separate build instructions below.

DNS lookup support
------------------

PgBouncer does host name lookups at connect time instead of just once
at configuration load time.  This requires an asynchronous DNS
implementation.  The following table shows supported backends and
their probing order:

| backend                    | parallel | EDNS0 (1) | /etc/hosts | SOA lookup (2) | note                                  |
|----------------------------|----------|-----------|------------|----------------|---------------------------------------|
| c-ares                     | yes      | yes       | yes        | yes            | IPv6+CNAME buggy in <=1.10            |
| udns                       | yes      | yes       | no         | yes            | IPv4 only                             |
| evdns, libevent 2.x        | yes      | no        | yes        | no             | does not check /etc/hosts updates     |
| getaddrinfo_a, glibc 2.9+  | yes      | yes (3)   | yes        | no             | N/A on non-glibc                      |
| getaddrinfo, libc          | no       | yes (3)   | yes        | no             | requires pthreads                     |

1. EDNS0 is required to have more than 8 addresses behind one host name.
2. SOA lookup is needed to re-check host names on zone serial change.
3. To enable EDNS0, add `options edns0` to `/etc/resolv.conf`.

c-ares is the most fully-featured implementation and is recommended
for most uses and binary packaging (if a sufficiently new version is
available).  Libevent's built-in evdns is also suitable for many uses,
with the listed restrictions.  The other backends are mostly legacy
options at this point and don't receive much testing anymore.

By default, c-ares is used if it can be found.  Its use can be forced
with `configure --with-cares` or disabled with `--without-cares`.  If
c-ares is not used (not found or disabled), then specify `--with-udns`
to pick udns, else Libevent is used.  Specify `--disable-evdns` to
disable the use of Libevent's evdns and fall back to a libc-based
implementation.

PAM authentication
------------------

To enable PAM authentication, `./configure` has a flag `--with-pam`
(default value is no).  When compiled with PAM support, a new global
authentication type `pam` is available to validate users through PAM.

systemd integration
-------------------

To enable systemd integration, use the `configure` option
`--with-systemd`.  This allows using `Type=notify` service units as
well as socket activation.  See `etc/pgbouncer.service` and
`etc/pgbouncer.socket` for examples.

Building from Git
-----------------

Building PgBouncer from Git requires that you fetch the libusual
submodule and generate the header and configuration files before
you can run `configure`:

	$ git clone https://github.com/pgbouncer/pgbouncer.git
	$ cd pgbouncer
	$ git submodule init
	$ git submodule update
	$ ./autogen.sh
	$ ./configure ...
	$ make
	$ make install

Additional packages required: autoconf, automake, libtool, pandoc

Building on Windows
-------------------

The only supported build environment on Windows is MinGW.  Cygwin and
Visual $ANYTHING are not supported.

To build on MinGW, do the usual:

	$ ./configure ...
	$ make

If cross-compiling from Unix:

	$ ./configure --host=i586-mingw32msvc ...

Running on Windows
------------------

Running from the command line goes as usual, except that the `-d` (daemonize),
`-R` (reboot), and `-u` (switch user) switches will not work.

To run PgBouncer as a Windows service, you need to configure the
`service_name` parameter to set a name for the service.  Then:

	$ pgbouncer -regservice config.ini

To uninstall the service:

	$ pgbouncer -unregservice config.ini

To use the Windows event log, set `syslog = 1` in the configuration file.
But before that, you need to register `pgbevent.dll`:

	$ regsvr32 pgbevent.dll

To unregister it, do:

	$ regsvr32 /u pgbevent.dll

Commit message:

Improve docs on how to run tests
Multiple new contributors had problems running tests locally. I guess
I'm used to Python its objectively bad dependency story, so it wasn't
much of a problem for me. This structures the testing docs a bit better
and also starts linking to them from the README.

It also adds an explanation on how to set up a virtual environment
(which would have solved one problem a contributor had).

README.md, after:

PgBouncer
=========

Lightweight connection pooler for PostgreSQL.

Homepage: <https://www.pgbouncer.org/>

Sources, bug tracking: <https://github.com/pgbouncer/pgbouncer>

Building
---------

PgBouncer depends on few things to get compiled:

* [GNU Make] 3.81+
* [Libevent] 2.0+
* [pkg-config]
* [OpenSSL] 1.0.1+ for TLS support
* (optional) [c-ares] as alternative to Libevent's evdns
* (optional) PAM libraries

[GNU Make]: https://www.gnu.org/software/make/
[Libevent]: http://libevent.org/
[pkg-config]: https://www.freedesktop.org/wiki/Software/pkg-config/
[OpenSSL]: https://www.openssl.org/
[c-ares]: http://c-ares.haxx.se/

When dependencies are installed just run:

    $ ./configure --prefix=/usr/local
    $ make
    $ make install

If you are building from Git, or are building for Windows, please see
separate build instructions below.

DNS lookup support
------------------

PgBouncer does host name lookups at connect time instead of just once
at configuration load time.  This requires an asynchronous DNS
implementation.  The following table shows supported backends and
their probing order:

| backend                    | parallel | EDNS0 (1) | /etc/hosts | SOA lookup (2) | note                                  |
|----------------------------|----------|-----------|------------|----------------|---------------------------------------|
| c-ares                     | yes      | yes       | yes        | yes            | IPv6+CNAME buggy in <=1.10            |
| udns                       | yes      | yes       | no         | yes            | IPv4 only                             |
| evdns, libevent 2.x        | yes      | no        | yes        | no             | does not check /etc/hosts updates     |
| getaddrinfo_a, glibc 2.9+  | yes      | yes (3)   | yes        | no             | N/A on non-glibc                      |
| getaddrinfo, libc          | no       | yes (3)   | yes        | no             | requires pthreads                     |

1. EDNS0 is required to have more than 8 addresses behind one host name.
2. SOA lookup is needed to re-check host names on zone serial change.
3. To enable EDNS0, add `options edns0` to `/etc/resolv.conf`.

c-ares is the most fully-featured implementation and is recommended
for most uses and binary packaging (if a sufficiently new version is
available).  Libevent's built-in evdns is also suitable for many uses,
with the listed restrictions.  The other backends are mostly legacy
options at this point and don't receive much testing anymore.

By default, c-ares is used if it can be found.  Its use can be forced
with `configure --with-cares` or disabled with `--without-cares`.  If
c-ares is not used (not found or disabled), then specify `--with-udns`
to pick udns, else Libevent is used.  Specify `--disable-evdns` to
disable the use of Libevent's evdns and fall back to a libc-based
implementation.

PAM authentication
------------------

To enable PAM authentication, `./configure` has a flag `--with-pam`
(default value is no).  When compiled with PAM support, a new global
authentication type `pam` is available to validate users through PAM.

systemd integration
-------------------

To enable systemd integration, use the `configure` option
`--with-systemd`.  This allows using `Type=notify` service units as
well as socket activation.  See `etc/pgbouncer.service` and
`etc/pgbouncer.socket` for examples.

Building from Git
-----------------

Building PgBouncer from Git requires that you fetch the libusual
submodule and generate the header and configuration files before
you can run `configure`:

	$ git clone https://github.com/pgbouncer/pgbouncer.git
	$ cd pgbouncer
	$ git submodule init
	$ git submodule update
	$ ./autogen.sh
	$ ./configure ...
	$ make
	$ make install

Additional packages required: autoconf, automake, libtool, pandoc

Testing
-------

See the [`README.md` file in the test directory][1] on how to run the tests.

[1]: https://github.com/pgbouncer/pgbouncer/blob/master/test/README.md

Building on Windows
-------------------

The only supported build environment on Windows is MinGW.  Cygwin and
Visual $ANYTHING are not supported.

To build on MinGW, do the usual:

	$ ./configure ...
	$ make

If cross-compiling from Unix:

	$ ./configure --host=i586-mingw32msvc ...

Running on Windows
------------------

Running from the command line goes as usual, except that the `-d` (daemonize),
`-R` (reboot), and `-u` (switch user) switches will not work.

To run PgBouncer as a Windows service, you need to configure the
`service_name` parameter to set a name for the service.  Then:

	$ pgbouncer -regservice config.ini

To uninstall the service:

	$ pgbouncer -unregservice config.ini

To use the Windows event log, set `syslog = 1` in the configuration file.
But before that, you need to register `pgbevent.dll`:

	$ regsvr32 pgbevent.dll

To unregister it, do:

	$ regsvr32 /u pgbevent.dll
