doc/usage.md, before:

# pgbouncer


## Synopsis

    pgbouncer [-d][-R][-v][-u user] <pgbouncer.ini>
    pgbouncer -V|-h

On Windows, the options are:

    pgbouncer.exe [-v][-u user] <pgbouncer.ini>
    pgbouncer.exe -V|-h

Additional options for setting up a Windows service:

    pgbouncer.exe --regservice   <pgbouncer.ini>
    pgbouncer.exe --unregservice <pgbouncer.ini>

## Description

**pgbouncer** is a PostgreSQL connection pooler. Any target application
can be connected to **pgbouncer** as if it were a PostgreSQL server,
and **pgbouncer** will create a connection to the actual server, or it
will reuse one of its existing connections.

The aim of **pgbouncer** is to lower the performance impact of opening
new connections to PostgreSQL.

In order not to compromise transaction semantics for connection
pooling, **pgbouncer** supports several types of pooling when
rotating connections:

Session pooling

:   Most polite method. When a client connects, a server connection will
    be assigned to it for the whole duration the client stays connected. When
    the client disconnects, the server connection will be put back into the pool.
    This is the default method.

Transaction pooling

:   A server connection is assigned to a client only during a transaction.
    When PgBouncer notices that transaction is over, the server connection
    will be put back into the pool.

Statement pooling

:   Most aggressive method. The server connection will be put back into the
    pool immediately after a query completes. Multi-statement
    transactions are disallowed in this mode as they would break.

The administration interface of **pgbouncer** consists of some new
`SHOW` commands available when connected to a special "virtual"
database **pgbouncer**.

## Quick-start

Basic setup and usage is as follows.

1. Create a pgbouncer.ini file.  Details in **pgbouncer(5)**.  Simple example:

        [databases]
        template1 = host=localhost port=5432 dbname=template1

        [pgbouncer]
        listen_port = 6432
        listen_addr = localhost
        auth_type = md5
        auth_file = userlist.txt
        logfile = pgbouncer.log
        pidfile = pgbouncer.pid
        admin_users = someuser

2. Create a `userlist.txt` file that contains the users allowed in:

        "someuser" "same_password_as_in_server"

3. Launch **pgbouncer**:

        $ pgbouncer -d pgbouncer.ini

4. Have your application (or the **psql** client) connect to
   **pgbouncer** instead of directly to the PostgreSQL server:

        $ psql -p 6432 -U someuser template1

5. Manage **pgbouncer** by connecting to the special administration
   database **pgbouncer** and issuing `SHOW HELP;` to begin:

        $ psql -p 6432 -U someuser pgbouncer
        pgbouncer=# SHOW HELP;
        NOTICE:  Console usage
        DETAIL:
          SHOW [HELP|CONFIG|DATABASES|FDS|POOLS|CLIENTS|SERVERS|SOCKETS|LISTS|VERSION|...]
          SET key = arg
          RELOAD
          PAUSE
          SUSPEND
          RESUME
          SHUTDOWN
          [...]

6. If you made changes to the pgbouncer.ini file, you can reload it with:

        pgbouncer=# RELOAD;

## Command line switches

`-d`, `--daemon`
:   Run in the background. Without it, the process will run in the foreground.

    In daemon mode, setting `pidfile` as well as `logfile` or `syslog`
    is required.  No log messages will be written to stderr after
    going into the background.

    Note: Does not work on Windows; **pgbouncer** need to run as service there.

`-R`, `--reboot`
:   Do an online restart. That means connecting to the running process,
    loading the open sockets from it, and then using them.  If there
    is no active process, boot normally.
    Note: Works only if OS supports Unix sockets and the `unix_socket_dir`
    is not disabled in configuration.  Does not work on Windows.
    Does not work with TLS connections, they are dropped.

`-u` _USERNAME_, `--user=`_USERNAME_
:   Switch to the given user on startup.

`-v`, `--verbose`
:   Increase verbosity.  Can be used multiple times.

`-q`, `--quiet`
:   Be quiet: do not log to stderr.  This does not affect
    logging verbosity, only that stderr is not to be used.
    For use in init.d scripts.

`-V`, `--version`
:   Show version.

`-h`, `--help`
:   Show short help.

`--regservice`
:   Win32: Register pgbouncer to run as Windows service.  The **service_name**
    configuration parameter value is used as the name to register under.

`--unregservice`
:   Win32: Unregister Windows service.

## Admin console

The console is available by connecting as normal to the
database **pgbouncer**:

    $ psql -p 6432 pgbouncer

Only users listed in the configuration parameters **admin_users** or **stats_users**
are allowed to log in to the console.  (Except when `auth_type=any`, then
any user is allowed in as a stats_user.)

Additionally, the user name **pgbouncer** is allowed to log in without password,
if the login comes via the Unix socket and the client has same Unix user UID
as the running process.

The admin console currently only supports the simple query protocol.
Some drivers use the extended query protocol for all commands; these
drivers will not work for this.

### Show commands

The **SHOW** commands output information. Each command is described below.

#### SHOW STATS

Shows statistics.  In this and related commands, the total figures are
since process start, the averages are updated every `stats_period`.

database
:   Statistics are presented per database.

total_xact_count
:   Total number of SQL transactions pooled by **pgbouncer**.

total_query_count
:   Total number of SQL queries pooled by **pgbouncer**.

total_received
:   Total volume in bytes of network traffic received by **pgbouncer**.

total_sent
:   Total volume in bytes of network traffic sent by **pgbouncer**.

total_xact_time
:   Total number of microseconds spent by **pgbouncer** when connected
    to PostgreSQL in a transaction, either idle in transaction or
    executing queries.

total_query_time
:   Total number of microseconds spent by **pgbouncer** when actively
    connected to PostgreSQL, executing queries.

total_wait_time
:   Time spent by clients waiting for a server, in microseconds.

avg_xact_count
:   Average transactions per second in last stat period.

avg_query_count
:   Average queries per second in last stat period.

avg_recv
:   Average received (from clients) bytes per second.

avg_sent
:   Average sent (to clients) bytes per second.

avg_xact_time
:   Average transaction duration, in microseconds.

avg_query_time
:   Average query duration, in microseconds.

avg_wait_time
:   Time spent by clients waiting for a server, in microseconds (average
    per second).

#### SHOW STATS_TOTALS

Subset of **SHOW STATS** showing the total values (**total_**).


#### SHOW STATS_AVERAGES

Subset of **SHOW STATS** showing the average values (**avg_**).

#### SHOW TOTALS

Like **SHOW STATS** but aggregated across all databases.

#### SHOW SERVERS

type
:   S, for server.

user
:   User name **pgbouncer** uses to connect to server.

database
:   Database name.

state
:   State of the pgbouncer server connection, one of **active**,
    **idle**, **used**, **tested**, **new**.

addr
:   IP address of PostgreSQL server.

port
:   Port of PostgreSQL server.

local_addr
:   Connection start address on local machine.

local_port
:   Connection start port on local machine.

connect_time
:   When the connection was made.

request_time
:   When last request was issued.

wait
:   Current waiting time in seconds.

wait_us
:   Microsecond part of the current waiting time.

close_needed
:   1 if the connection will be closed as soon as possible,
    because a configuration file reload or DNS update changed the
    connection information or **RECONNECT** was issued.

ptr
:   Address of internal object for this connection.
    Used as unique ID.

link
:   Address of client connection the server is paired with.

remote_pid
:   PID of backend server process.  In case connection is made over
    Unix socket and OS supports getting process ID info, its
    OS PID.  Otherwise it's extracted from cancel packet the server sent,
    which should be the PID in case the server is PostgreSQL, but it's a random
    number in case the server it is another PgBouncer.

tls
:   A string with TLS connection information, or empty if not using TLS.

#### SHOW CLIENTS

type
:   C, for client.

user
:   Client connected user.

database
:   Database name.

state
:   State of the client connection, one of **active** or **waiting**.

addr
:   IP address of client.

port
:   Source port of client.

local_addr
:   Connection end address on local machine.

local_port
:   Connection end port on local machine.

connect_time
:   Timestamp of connect time.

request_time
:   Timestamp of latest client request.

wait
:   Current waiting time in seconds.

wait_us
:   Microsecond part of the current waiting time.

close_needed
:   not used for clients

ptr
:   Address of internal object for this connection.
    Used as unique ID.

link
:   Address of server connection the client is paired with.

remote_pid
:   Process ID, in case client connects over Unix socket
    and OS supports getting it.

tls
:   A string with TLS connection information, or empty if not using TLS.

#### SHOW POOLS

A new pool entry is made for each couple of (database, user).

database
:   Database name.

user
:   User name.

cl_active
:   Client connections that are linked to server connection and can process queries.

cl_waiting
:   Client connections that have sent queries but have not yet got a server connection.

cl_cancel_req
:   Client connections that have not forwarded query cancellations to the server yet.

sv_active
:   Server connections that are linked to a client.

sv_idle
:   Server connections that are unused and immediately usable for client queries.

sv_used
:   Server connections that have been idle for more than `server_check_delay`,
    so they need `server_check_query` to run on them before they can be used again.

sv_tested
:   Server connections that are currently running either `server_reset_query`
    or `server_check_query`.

sv_login
:   Server connections currently in the process of logging in.

maxwait
:   How long the first (oldest) client in the queue has waited, in seconds.
    If this starts increasing, then the current pool of servers does
    not handle requests quickly enough.  The reason may be either an overloaded
    server or just too small of a **pool_size** setting.

maxwait_us
:   Microsecond part of the maximum waiting time.

pool_mode
:   The pooling mode in use.

#### SHOW LISTS

Show following internal information, in columns (not rows):

databases
:   Count of databases.

users
:   Count of users.

pools
:   Count of pools.

free_clients
:   Count of free clients.

used_clients
:   Count of used clients.

login_clients
:   Count of clients in **login** state.

free_servers
:   Count of free servers.

used_servers
:   Count of used servers.

dns_names
:   Count of DNS names in the cache.

dns_zones
:   Count of DNS zones in the cache.

dns_queries
:   Count of in-flight DNS queries.

dns_pending
:   not used

#### SHOW USERS

name
:   The user name

pool_mode
:   The user's override pool_mode, or NULL if the default will be used instead.

#### SHOW DATABASES

name
:   Name of configured database entry.

host
:   Host pgbouncer connects to.

port
:   Port pgbouncer connects to.

database
:   Actual database name pgbouncer connects to.

force_user
:   When the user is part of the connection string, the connection between
    pgbouncer and PostgreSQL is forced to the given user, whatever the
    client user.

pool_size
:   Maximum number of server connections.

min_pool_size
:   Minimum number of server connections.

reserve_pool
:   Maximum number of additional connections for this database.

pool_mode
:   The database's override pool_mode, or NULL if the default will be used instead.

max_connections
:   Maximum number of allowed connections for this database, as set by
    **max_db_connections**, either globally or per database.

current_connections
:   Current number of connections for this database.

paused
:   1 if this database is currently paused, else 0.

disabled
:   1 if this database is currently disabled, else 0.

#### SHOW FDS

Internal command - shows list of file descriptors in use with internal state attached to them.

When the connected user has the user name "pgbouncer", connects through the Unix socket
and has same the UID as the running process, the actual FDs are passed over the connection.
This mechanism is used to do an online restart.
Note: This does not work on Windows.

This command also blocks the internal event loop, so it should not be used
while PgBouncer is in use.

fd
:   File descriptor numeric value.

task
:   One of **pooler**, **client** or **server**.

user
:   User of the connection using the FD.

database
:   Database of the connection using the FD.

addr
:   IP address of the connection using the FD, **unix** if a Unix socket
    is used.

port
:   Port used by the connection using the FD.

cancel
:   Cancel key for this connection.

link
:   fd for corresponding server/client.  NULL if idle.

#### SHOW SOCKETS, SHOW ACTIVE_SOCKETS

Shows low-level information about sockets or only active sockets.
This includes the information shown under **SHOW CLIENTS** and **SHOW
SERVERS** as well as other more low-level information.

#### SHOW CONFIG

Show the current configuration settings, one per row, with the following
columns:

key
:   Configuration variable name

value
:   Configuration value

default
:   Configuration default value

changeable
:   Either **yes** or **no**, shows if the variable can be changed while running.
    If **no**, the variable can be changed only at boot time.  Use
    **SET** to change a variable at run time.

#### SHOW MEM

Shows low-level information about the current sizes of various
internal memory allocations.  The information presented is subject to
change.

#### SHOW DNS_HOSTS

Show host names in DNS cache.

hostname
:   Host name.

ttl
:   How many seconds until next lookup.

addrs
:   Comma separated list of addresses.

#### SHOW DNS_ZONES

Show DNS zones in cache.

zonename
:   Zone name.

serial
:   Current serial.

count
:   Host names belonging to this zone.


#### SHOW VERSION

Show the PgBouncer version string.


### Process controlling commands

#### PAUSE [db]

PgBouncer tries to disconnect from all servers, first waiting for all queries
to complete. The command will not return before all queries are finished.  To be used
at the time of database restart.

If database name is given, only that database will be paused.

New client connections to a paused database will wait until **RESUME**
is called.

#### DISABLE db

Reject all new client connections on the given database.

#### ENABLE db

Allow new client connections after a previous **DISABLE** command.

#### RECONNECT [db]

Close each open server connection for the given database, or all
databases, after it is released (according to the pooling mode), even
if its lifetime is not up yet.  New server connections can be made
immediately and will connect as necessary according to the pool size
settings.

This command is useful when the server connection setup has changed,
for example to perform a gradual switchover to a new server.  It is
*not* necessary to run this command when the connection string in
pgbouncer.ini has been changed and reloaded (see **RELOAD**) or when
DNS resolution has changed, because then the equivalent of this
command will be run automatically.  This command is only necessary if
something downstream of PgBouncer routes the connections.

After this command is run, there could be an extended period where
some server connections go to an old destination and some server
connections go to a new destination.  This is likely only sensible
when switching read-only traffic between read-only replicas, or when
switching between nodes of a multimaster replication setup.  If all
connections need to be switched at the same time, **PAUSE** is
recommended instead.  To close server connections without waiting (for
example, in emergency failover rather than gradual switchover
scenarios), also consider **KILL**.

#### KILL db

Immediately drop all client and server connections on given database.

New client connections to a killed database will wait until **RESUME**
is called.

#### SUSPEND

All socket buffers are flushed and PgBouncer stops listening for data on them.
The command will not return before all buffers are empty.  To be used at the time
of PgBouncer online reboot.

New client connections to a suspended database will wait until
**RESUME** is called.

#### RESUME [db]

Resume work from previous **KILL**, **PAUSE**, or **SUSPEND** command.

#### SHUTDOWN

The PgBouncer process will exit.

#### RELOAD

The PgBouncer process will reload its configuration file and update
changeable settings.

PgBouncer notices when a configuration file reload changes the
connection parameters of a database definition.  An existing server
connection to the old destination will be closed when the server
connection is next released (according to the pooling mode), and new
server connections will immediately use the updated connection
parameters.

#### WAIT_CLOSE [db]

Wait until all server connections, either of the specified database or
of all databases, have cleared the "close_needed" state (see **SHOW
SERVERS**).  This can be called after a **RECONNECT** or **RELOAD** to
wait until the respective configuration change has been fully
activated, for example in switchover scripts.

### Other commands

#### SET key = arg

Changes a configuration setting (see also **SHOW CONFIG**).  For example:

    SET log_connections = 1;
    SET server_check_query = 'select 2';

(Note that this command is run on the PgBouncer admin console and sets
PgBouncer settings.  A **SET** command run on another database will be
passed to the PostgreSQL backend like any other SQL command.)

### Signals

SIGHUP
:   Reload config. Same as issuing the command **RELOAD** on the console.

SIGINT
:   Safe shutdown. Same as issuing **PAUSE** and **SHUTDOWN** on the console.

SIGTERM
:   Immediate shutdown. Same as issuing **SHUTDOWN** on the console.

SIGUSR1
:   Same as issuing **PAUSE** on the console.

SIGUSR2
:   Same as issuing **RESUME** on the console.

### Libevent settings

From the Libevent documentation:

> It is possible to disable support for epoll, kqueue, devpoll, poll
> or select by setting the environment variable EVENT_NOEPOLL,
> EVENT_NOKQUEUE, EVENT_NODEVPOLL, EVENT_NOPOLL or EVENT_NOSELECT,
> respectively.
>
> By setting the environment variable EVENT_SHOW_METHOD, libevent
> displays the kernel notification method that it uses.

## See also

pgbouncer(5) - man page of configuration settings descriptions

<https://www.pgbouncer.org/>

Commit message:

Remove automatic auth_file reload
Before, the auth_file was stat()ed three times a second and
automatically reloaded when it was changed.  This caused some
performance problems if the file system is very busy, and it was also
undocumented and surprising.

Now, the auth_file is only reloaded when a configuration file reload
is explicitly requested (RELOAD command or similar).  This is also
documented now.

Presumably, the origin of this behavior is that in ancient times,
auth_file was meant to point into the PostgreSQL data directory, and
with this behavior it would pick up user changes made through
PostgreSQL automatically.  But that is no longer the way it is used,
so an explicit reload is more appropriate now.

closes #377, closes #574

doc/usage.md, after:

# pgbouncer


## Synopsis

    pgbouncer [-d][-R][-v][-u user] <pgbouncer.ini>
    pgbouncer -V|-h

On Windows, the options are:

    pgbouncer.exe [-v][-u user] <pgbouncer.ini>
    pgbouncer.exe -V|-h

Additional options for setting up a Windows service:

    pgbouncer.exe --regservice   <pgbouncer.ini>
    pgbouncer.exe --unregservice <pgbouncer.ini>

## Description

**pgbouncer** is a PostgreSQL connection pooler. Any target application
can be connected to **pgbouncer** as if it were a PostgreSQL server,
and **pgbouncer** will create a connection to the actual server, or it
will reuse one of its existing connections.

The aim of **pgbouncer** is to lower the performance impact of opening
new connections to PostgreSQL.

In order not to compromise transaction semantics for connection
pooling, **pgbouncer** supports several types of pooling when
rotating connections:

Session pooling

:   Most polite method. When a client connects, a server connection will
    be assigned to it for the whole duration the client stays connected. When
    the client disconnects, the server connection will be put back into the pool.
    This is the default method.

Transaction pooling

:   A server connection is assigned to a client only during a transaction.
    When PgBouncer notices that transaction is over, the server connection
    will be put back into the pool.

Statement pooling

:   Most aggressive method. The server connection will be put back into the
    pool immediately after a query completes. Multi-statement
    transactions are disallowed in this mode as they would break.

The administration interface of **pgbouncer** consists of some new
`SHOW` commands available when connected to a special "virtual"
database **pgbouncer**.

## Quick-start

Basic setup and usage is as follows.

1. Create a pgbouncer.ini file.  Details in **pgbouncer(5)**.  Simple example:

        [databases]
        template1 = host=localhost port=5432 dbname=template1

        [pgbouncer]
        listen_port = 6432
        listen_addr = localhost
        auth_type = md5
        auth_file = userlist.txt
        logfile = pgbouncer.log
        pidfile = pgbouncer.pid
        admin_users = someuser

2. Create a `userlist.txt` file that contains the users allowed in:

        "someuser" "same_password_as_in_server"

3. Launch **pgbouncer**:

        $ pgbouncer -d pgbouncer.ini

4. Have your application (or the **psql** client) connect to
   **pgbouncer** instead of directly to the PostgreSQL server:

        $ psql -p 6432 -U someuser template1

5. Manage **pgbouncer** by connecting to the special administration
   database **pgbouncer** and issuing `SHOW HELP;` to begin:

        $ psql -p 6432 -U someuser pgbouncer
        pgbouncer=# SHOW HELP;
        NOTICE:  Console usage
        DETAIL:
          SHOW [HELP|CONFIG|DATABASES|FDS|POOLS|CLIENTS|SERVERS|SOCKETS|LISTS|VERSION|...]
          SET key = arg
          RELOAD
          PAUSE
          SUSPEND
          RESUME
          SHUTDOWN
          [...]

6. If you made changes to the pgbouncer.ini file, you can reload it with:

        pgbouncer=# RELOAD;

## Command line switches

`-d`, `--daemon`
:   Run in the background. Without it, the process will run in the foreground.

    In daemon mode, setting `pidfile` as well as `logfile` or `syslog`
    is required.  No log messages will be written to stderr after
    going into the background.

    Note: Does not work on Windows; **pgbouncer** need to run as service there.

`-R`, `--reboot`
:   Do an online restart. That means connecting to the running process,
    loading the open sockets from it, and then using them.  If there
    is no active process, boot normally.
    Note: Works only if OS supports Unix sockets and the `unix_socket_dir`
    is not disabled in configuration.  Does not work on Windows.
    Does not work with TLS connections, they are dropped.

`-u` _USERNAME_, `--user=`_USERNAME_
:   Switch to the given user on startup.

`-v`, `--verbose`
:   Increase verbosity.  Can be used multiple times.

`-q`, `--quiet`
:   Be quiet: do not log to stderr.  This does not affect
    logging verbosity, only that stderr is not to be used.
    For use in init.d scripts.

`-V`, `--version`
:   Show version.

`-h`, `--help`
:   Show short help.

`--regservice`
:   Win32: Register pgbouncer to run as Windows service.  The **service_name**
    configuration parameter value is used as the name to register under.

`--unregservice`
:   Win32: Unregister Windows service.

## Admin console

The console is available by connecting as normal to the
database **pgbouncer**:

    $ psql -p 6432 pgbouncer

Only users listed in the configuration parameters **admin_users** or **stats_users**
are allowed to log in to the console.  (Except when `auth_type=any`, then
any user is allowed in as a stats_user.)

Additionally, the user name **pgbouncer** is allowed to log in without password,
if the login comes via the Unix socket and the client has same Unix user UID
as the running process.

The admin console currently only supports the simple query protocol.
Some drivers use the extended query protocol for all commands; these
drivers will not work for this.

### Show commands

The **SHOW** commands output information. Each command is described below.

#### SHOW STATS

Shows statistics.  In this and related commands, the total figures are
since process start, the averages are updated every `stats_period`.

database
:   Statistics are presented per database.

total_xact_count
:   Total number of SQL transactions pooled by **pgbouncer**.

total_query_count
:   Total number of SQL queries pooled by **pgbouncer**.

total_received
:   Total volume in bytes of network traffic received by **pgbouncer**.

total_sent
:   Total volume in bytes of network traffic sent by **pgbouncer**.

total_xact_time
:   Total number of microseconds spent by **pgbouncer** when connected
    to PostgreSQL in a transaction, either idle in transaction or
    executing queries.

total_query_time
:   Total number of microseconds spent by **pgbouncer** when actively
    connected to PostgreSQL, executing queries.

total_wait_time
:   Time spent by clients waiting for a server, in microseconds.

avg_xact_count
:   Average transactions per second in last stat period.

avg_query_count
:   Average queries per second in last stat period.

avg_recv
:   Average received (from clients) bytes per second.

avg_sent
:   Average sent (to clients) bytes per second.

avg_xact_time
:   Average transaction duration, in microseconds.

avg_query_time
:   Average query duration, in microseconds.

avg_wait_time
:   Time spent by clients waiting for a server, in microseconds (average
    per second).

#### SHOW STATS_TOTALS

Subset of **SHOW STATS** showing the total values (**total_**).


#### SHOW STATS_AVERAGES

Subset of **SHOW STATS** showing the average values (**avg_**).

#### SHOW TOTALS

Like **SHOW STATS** but aggregated across all databases.

#### SHOW SERVERS

type
:   S, for server.

user
:   User name **pgbouncer** uses to connect to server.

database
:   Database name.

state
:   State of the pgbouncer server connection, one of **active**,
    **idle**, **used**, **tested**, **new**.

addr
:   IP address of PostgreSQL server.

port
:   Port of PostgreSQL server.

local_addr
:   Connection start address on local machine.

local_port
:   Connection start port on local machine.

connect_time
:   When the connection was made.

request_time
:   When last request was issued.

wait
:   Current waiting time in seconds.

wait_us
:   Microsecond part of the current waiting time.

close_needed
:   1 if the connection will be closed as soon as possible,
    because a configuration file reload or DNS update changed the
    connection information or **RECONNECT** was issued.

ptr
:   Address of internal object for this connection.
    Used as unique ID.

link
:   Address of client connection the server is paired with.

remote_pid
:   PID of backend server process.  In case connection is made over
    Unix socket and OS supports getting process ID info, its
    OS PID.  Otherwise it's extracted from cancel packet the server sent,
    which should be the PID in case the server is PostgreSQL, but it's a random
    number in case the server it is another PgBouncer.

tls
:   A string with TLS connection information, or empty if not using TLS.

#### SHOW CLIENTS

type
:   C, for client.

user
:   Client connected user.

database
:   Database name.

state
:   State of the client connection, one of **active** or **waiting**.

addr
:   IP address of client.

port
:   Source port of client.

local_addr
:   Connection end address on local machine.

local_port
:   Connection end port on local machine.

connect_time
:   Timestamp of connect time.

request_time
:   Timestamp of latest client request.

wait
:   Current waiting time in seconds.

wait_us
:   Microsecond part of the current waiting time.

close_needed
:   not used for clients

ptr
:   Address of internal object for this connection.
    Used as unique ID.

link
:   Address of server connection the client is paired with.

remote_pid
:   Process ID, in case client connects over Unix socket
    and OS supports getting it.

tls
:   A string with TLS connection information, or empty if not using TLS.

#### SHOW POOLS

A new pool entry is made for each couple of (database, user).

database
:   Database name.

user
:   User name.

cl_active
:   Client connections that are linked to server connection and can process queries.

cl_waiting
:   Client connections that have sent queries but have not yet got a server connection.

cl_cancel_req
:   Client connections that have not forwarded query cancellations to the server yet.

sv_active
:   Server connections that are linked to a client.

sv_idle
:   Server connections that are unused and immediately usable for client queries.

sv_used
:   Server connections that have been idle for more than `server_check_delay`,
    so they need `server_check_query` to run on them before they can be used again.

sv_tested
:   Server connections that are currently running either `server_reset_query`
    or `server_check_query`.

sv_login
:   Server connections currently in the process of logging in.

maxwait
:   How long the first (oldest) client in the queue has waited, in seconds.
    If this starts increasing, then the current pool of servers does
    not handle requests quickly enough.  The reason may be either an overloaded
    server or just too small of a **pool_size** setting.

maxwait_us
:   Microsecond part of the maximum waiting time.

pool_mode
:   The pooling mode in use.

#### SHOW LISTS

Show following internal information, in columns (not rows):

databases
:   Count of databases.

users
:   Count of users.

pools
:   Count of pools.

free_clients
:   Count of free clients.

used_clients
:   Count of used clients.

login_clients
:   Count of clients in **login** state.

free_servers
:   Count of free servers.

used_servers
:   Count of used servers.

dns_names
:   Count of DNS names in the cache.

dns_zones
:   Count of DNS zones in the cache.

dns_queries
:   Count of in-flight DNS queries.

dns_pending
:   not used

#### SHOW USERS

name
:   The user name

pool_mode
:   The user's override pool_mode, or NULL if the default will be used instead.

#### SHOW DATABASES

name
:   Name of configured database entry.

host
:   Host pgbouncer connects to.

port
:   Port pgbouncer connects to.

database
:   Actual database name pgbouncer connects to.

force_user
:   When the user is part of the connection string, the connection between
    pgbouncer and PostgreSQL is forced to the given user, whatever the
    client user.

pool_size
:   Maximum number of server connections.

min_pool_size
:   Minimum number of server connections.

reserve_pool
:   Maximum number of additional connections for this database.

pool_mode
:   The database's override pool_mode, or NULL if the default will be used instead.

max_connections
:   Maximum number of allowed connections for this database, as set by
    **max_db_connections**, either globally or per database.

current_connections
:   Current number of connections for this database.

paused
:   1 if this database is currently paused, else 0.

disabled
:   1 if this database is currently disabled, else 0.

#### SHOW FDS

Internal command - shows list of file descriptors in use with internal state attached to them.

When the connected user has the user name "pgbouncer", connects through the Unix socket
and has same the UID as the running process, the actual FDs are passed over the connection.
This mechanism is used to do an online restart.
Note: This does not work on Windows.

This command also blocks the internal event loop, so it should not be used
while PgBouncer is in use.

fd
:   File descriptor numeric value.

task
:   One of **pooler**, **client** or **server**.

user
:   User of the connection using the FD.

database
:   Database of the connection using the FD.

addr
:   IP address of the connection using the FD, **unix** if a Unix socket
    is used.

port
:   Port used by the connection using the FD.

cancel
:   Cancel key for this connection.

link
:   fd for corresponding server/client.  NULL if idle.

#### SHOW SOCKETS, SHOW ACTIVE_SOCKETS

Shows low-level information about sockets or only active sockets.
This includes the information shown under **SHOW CLIENTS** and **SHOW
SERVERS** as well as other more low-level information.

#### SHOW CONFIG

Show the current configuration settings, one per row, with the following
columns:

key
:   Configuration variable name

value
:   Configuration value

default
:   Configuration default value

changeable
:   Either **yes** or **no**, shows if the variable can be changed while running.
    If **no**, the variable can be changed only at boot time.  Use
    **SET** to change a variable at run time.

#### SHOW MEM

Shows low-level information about the current sizes of various
internal memory allocations.  The information presented is subject to
change.

#### SHOW DNS_HOSTS

Show host names in DNS cache.

hostname
:   Host name.

ttl
:   How many seconds until next lookup.

addrs
:   Comma separated list of addresses.

#### SHOW DNS_ZONES

Show DNS zones in cache.

zonename
:   Zone name.

serial
:   Current serial.

count
:   Host names belonging to this zone.


#### SHOW VERSION

Show the PgBouncer version string.


### Process controlling commands

#### PAUSE [db]

PgBouncer tries to disconnect from all servers, first waiting for all queries
to complete. The command will not return before all queries are finished.  To be used
at the time of database restart.

If database name is given, only that database will be paused.

New client connections to a paused database will wait until **RESUME**
is called.

#### DISABLE db

Reject all new client connections on the given database.

#### ENABLE db

Allow new client connections after a previous **DISABLE** command.

#### RECONNECT [db]

Close each open server connection for the given database, or all
databases, after it is released (according to the pooling mode), even
if its lifetime is not up yet.  New server connections can be made
immediately and will connect as necessary according to the pool size
settings.

This command is useful when the server connection setup has changed,
for example to perform a gradual switchover to a new server.  It is
*not* necessary to run this command when the connection string in
pgbouncer.ini has been changed and reloaded (see **RELOAD**) or when
DNS resolution has changed, because then the equivalent of this
command will be run automatically.  This command is only necessary if
something downstream of PgBouncer routes the connections.

After this command is run, there could be an extended period where
some server connections go to an old destination and some server
connections go to a new destination.  This is likely only sensible
when switching read-only traffic between read-only replicas, or when
switching between nodes of a multimaster replication setup.  If all
connections need to be switched at the same time, **PAUSE** is
recommended instead.  To close server connections without waiting (for
example, in emergency failover rather than gradual switchover
scenarios), also consider **KILL**.

#### KILL db

Immediately drop all client and server connections on given database.

New client connections to a killed database will wait until **RESUME**
is called.

#### SUSPEND

All socket buffers are flushed and PgBouncer stops listening for data on them.
The command will not return before all buffers are empty.  To be used at the time
of PgBouncer online reboot.

New client connections to a suspended database will wait until
**RESUME** is called.

#### RESUME [db]

Resume work from previous **KILL**, **PAUSE**, or **SUSPEND** command.

#### SHUTDOWN

The PgBouncer process will exit.

#### RELOAD

The PgBouncer process will reload its configuration files and update
changeable settings.  This includes the main configuration file as
well as the files specified by the settings `auth_file` and
`auth_hba_file`.

PgBouncer notices when a configuration file reload changes the
connection parameters of a database definition.  An existing server
connection to the old destination will be closed when the server
connection is next released (according to the pooling mode), and new
server connections will immediately use the updated connection
parameters.

#### WAIT_CLOSE [db]

Wait until all server connections, either of the specified database or
of all databases, have cleared the "close_needed" state (see **SHOW
SERVERS**).  This can be called after a **RECONNECT** or **RELOAD** to
wait until the respective configuration change has been fully
activated, for example in switchover scripts.

### Other commands

#### SET key = arg

Changes a configuration setting (see also **SHOW CONFIG**).  For example:

    SET log_connections = 1;
    SET server_check_query = 'select 2';

(Note that this command is run on the PgBouncer admin console and sets
PgBouncer settings.  A **SET** command run on another database will be
passed to the PostgreSQL backend like any other SQL command.)

### Signals

SIGHUP
:   Reload config. Same as issuing the command **RELOAD** on the console.

SIGINT
:   Safe shutdown. Same as issuing **PAUSE** and **SHUTDOWN** on the console.

SIGTERM
:   Immediate shutdown. Same as issuing **SHUTDOWN** on the console.

SIGUSR1
:   Same as issuing **PAUSE** on the console.

SIGUSR2
:   Same as issuing **RESUME** on the console.

### Libevent settings

From the Libevent documentation:

> It is possible to disable support for epoll, kqueue, devpoll, poll
> or select by setting the environment variable EVENT_NOEPOLL,
> EVENT_NOKQUEUE, EVENT_NODEVPOLL, EVENT_NOPOLL or EVENT_NOSELECT,
> respectively.
>
> By setting the environment variable EVENT_SHOW_METHOD, libevent
> displays the kernel notification method that it uses.

## See also

pgbouncer(5) - man page of configuration settings descriptions

<https://www.pgbouncer.org/>
